---
title: Introduction: Engineering and Measurement
description: Lab on chip and mechanics quantification
---

## Microenvironment in terms of forces/pressures/matrix

As we know apart from genes and biochemical signalling cascades, the mechanical properties of both the tissue and its microenvironment substantially impact epithelial behaviours. The cells engage in continuous feedback loop with its surroundings causing alteration in its cytoskeleton and matrix. Therefore, the rheological behaviour of biological materials, from cortical actin networks to large cell assemblies, is a complicated compromise between competing forces, cellular events and external stimuli.

## External stimuli through matrix

At tissue scale, the epithelia sense its environment through cell-matrix adhesion, where it shows response to stiffness changes—durotaxis; like in neural crest migration in Xenopus laevis (Alkobtawi, M., et al., 2018). It also perceives cell crowding; and cells delaminate from those sites to ease higher intercellular tensions. It can be observed during homeostasis in the colon epithelia (Eisenhoffer, G. T. et al. 2012). Not just matrix affects cells, but reverse is also true. In case of Drosophila oogenesis, disorganised matrix is remodelled into a polarised, restrictive matrix, which aligns with the actin bundles in the follicular epithelium through coordinated rotation of the cells (Cetera, M. et al. 2014; Haigo, S. L. & Bilder, D. 2011). These polarised fibres can in turn guide the directed motion of cells (Cetera, M. et al. 2014; Nam, K.-H. et al. 2016). Similar case is found in tumour mass embedded in collagen-rich matrix (Shields, M. A., et al., 2012), where invasive cancer cells can also remodel the tumour stroma to promote invasion.

## Examples of engineered environments

Due to all these factors, it is difficult to decouple the various biophysical aspects of matrix, such as material stiffness, spatial confinement, porosity, viscoelasticity, material degradability and binding affinity. But efforts have been made to replicate and study tissue dynamics and mechanics in vitro using cell biology, microengineering, materials and modelling approaches. 
Using such a techniques, collective cell migration under confinement (Vedula, S. R. K. et al., 2012; Xi, W., et al., 2017; Yevick, H. G., et al., 2015), collective durotaxis (Sunyer, R. et al., 2016), geometrical and stretching-controlled epithelial extrusion (Eisenhoffer, G. T. et al., 2012; Saw, T. B. et al. 2017) and epithelial growth regulation in two dimensions (Nelson, C. M. et al., 2005) and three dimensions (Salomon, J. et al., 2017) is studied, which led to a better understanding of cell-ECM interactions (Ladoux, B. & Mège, R.-M. 2017) and of tissue as active matter (Prost, J., Jülicher, F. & Joanny, J. F. 2015). In vitro studies have elucidated the effects of multiple mechanical cues of the microenvironment on cellular behaviour, and insights into tissue mechanics have promoted the development of new materials and design methods for bioengineering, in vitro modelling, immunotherapy and gene therapy.

### Substrate Patterning

Commonly, synthetic substrates like plastics (PET, PEGDA), hydrogels (Polyacrylamide, collagen gels), and elastomers (soft PDMS) are used to study mechanics because one can control rigidity, topography and mechanical forces. They can be fabricated using basic chemistry and new microfabrication technologies like lithography. For example, 2D substrates are patterned with adhesive or non-adhesive ECM to control tissue/cell shape. This has revealed complex behaviour in arrangement of epithelia in confinement (ref) and mechanism of force transmission throughout the tissue (ref). 2D Surface ECM patterning and topography also have helped in engineering 3D epithelial.  Moreover, the integration of different techniques and materials further allows even higher levels of complexity in both two and three dimensions (Xia, Y. N. & Whitesides, G. M. 1998; Théry, M. 2010; Alom Ruiz, S. & Chen, C. S. 2007). For example, multiple proteins can be patterned on flat as well as 3D surfaces using UV patterning and stencilling (Ruprecht, V. et al., 2017) to form adhesive patterns with spatially controlled adhesive strengths.

### Mechanical forces/pressures

Living systems do not just have spatial control, they also have mechanical control through physical forces emerging out of growth, deformation and remodelling of ECM, and flow or arrest of fluids in closed geometries (ref). In our body, intestinal epithelia are stretched during peristaltic movements in the gut and lung alveoli deform during breathing (Ethier CR, Simmons CA, 2007). Not just tension, compression is known to guide several morphogenetic events involving tissue bending and folding, such as the formation of the optic cup (Sidhaye, J. & Norden, C. 2017), gut villi (Shyer, A. E. et al., 2013), and cortical convolutions in the brain (Tallinen, T. et al. 2016)
In developing embryo, embryonic and extraembryonic fluids generate forces: frictional and tensional stresses when flowing (Freund et al., 2012), or hydrostatic pressures when in confined spaces (Navis and Bagnat, 2015). The mouse embryo indeed initially floats within intraluminal fluid (Chen et al., 2013), forms numerous fluid-filled cavities upon implantation (Christodoulou et al., 2018), and establishes flows of distinct regimes throughout later development (Freund et al.,2012). These fluids pass on critical information through soluble chemicals (Zhanget al., 2018). However, not much is known about the developmental relevance of the mechanical stresses these fluids also exert (ref).
At the blastocyst stage, when the embryo is little more than a fluid filled sphere, internal hydrostatic pressure not only determines embryonic size but also directs allocation of fates by affecting allocation to internal or external compartments (Chan et al., 2019). As a fluid filled structure, imagine a balloon, the hydrostatic pressure inside relates to tension in the surface. Any changes in luminal volumes are sensed by cells through the increased cortical tension, which in turn induces changes in cell shape and cytoskeletal organization (Chan et al., 2019; Latorre et al., 2018). Later in development, the pressure exerted by the fluid within the amniotic cavity has been postulated to direct notochord convergent extension by exerting anisotropic forces on the underlying axial mesoderm (Imuta et al., 2014). Clearly, the fluid dimension of the embryo plays key developmental functions, strengthening calls for an increased recognition of its role along-side the better-appreciated cues presented by the solid environment of cells and tissues (Kaul and Ventikos, 2015).

## Rheological measurements

Epithelial tissues are much complicated materials than that of simple metals or polymers. However, the complex biological behaviour can be connected to mechanical response using basic material testing techniques (ref). Typically, it is done by probing the material mechanically and then recording its deformation, or by deforming the material and recording force response. In mechanical terms, one records material behaviour with stress (force) strain (deformation) relation, often called as constitutive relation and can be quantified in term of passive and active rheological properties (ref). This depends on the type of deformation as in shear, tension, or compression and is also multiaxial like in composite materials (ref). The rheological properties often correlate with their physiological state and are crucial for their specific functions (Park, J.-A. et al. 2015; Vedula, S. R. K. et al. 2015, Vedula, S. R. K. et al. 2014). For example, Heart failure is often due to the loss of contractility of heart muscle cells; as it is observed in remodelling under mechanical stretch (Fung YC, 1990). So, one must test rheological properties along with different microenvironment. 
The mechanical information include deformation, rates of deformation or velocity fields, traction forces exerted by cells on the substrate and intercellular mechanical stress. Coupling these parameters with information on cellular architecture, obtained by imaging, can provide a mechanistic understanding of tissue rheology (Roca-Cusachs, P., Conte, V. & Trepat, X. 2017). This has been done at the molecular and subcellular scales using, atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Emad, A. et al. 1998), magnetic beads (Broders-Bondon, F., et al, 2018), optical tweezers (Bambardekar, K., et al., 2015), and micropipettes (Evans, E. & Yeung, A. 1989); and at larger scale using stretching devices, tissue rheometers and force plates (Huh, D. et al 2010; Gudipaty, S. A. et al. 2017). This reveals complex mechanism of strain stiffening and viscoelastic behaviour at different regimes of deformation involving different parts of cytoskeleton. Also, elucidated the signalling pathways in terms of transcription factors like YAP involved in mechanosensing (ref).

## Suspended monolayers

As mentioned earlier, the tissue-matrix interaction is playing a critical role in sensing and transmitting forces rapidly (Tambe, Dhananjay T., et al. 2011; Sunyer, R., et al., 2016; Serra-Picamal, X., et al., 2012). However, in early embryonic epithelia where little or no ECM is present, stresses generated by actomyosin contraction of the cells in one tissue are transmitted over long ranges via intercellular adhesions to other tissues. Thus, intrinsic tension generated in some embryonic tissues acts as an extrinsic stress on other tissues. For example, in the Drosophila wing disk, contraction of the wing hinge applies tension on the wing blade (Etournay, R., et al., 2015). During dorsal extension, stresses exerted by the invaginating dorsal mid gut play a role in orienting junction elongation after intercalation (Collinet, C., et al., 2015). During epiboly in zebrafish, an actin belt in the yolk cell applies tension on the enveloping layer (Behrndt, M., et al., 2012). 
The system of studying just simple free-standing epithelial monolayer is very appealing in terms of characterising mechanical response to stretch at different time scales. This also allows to look at cellular scale phenomenon in terms of actin network remodelling and dynamics of cell-cell adhesion. 
In experimental setup developed in Harris AR et al., 2012, they were able to create suspended monolayer between two rods. This was done by culturing cell monolayer on collagen matrix on top of two rods; later matrix was removed using enzymatic digestion. The system of two rod allowed them to conduct mechanical tensile testing on the suspended monolayer with force measurement in the tissue. These experiments showed that elasticity measurements of monolayer were two orders of magnitude larger than that of individual cellular parts, and monolayer could sustain more than 200% strain before rupture of cell-cell junction. Moreover, imaging of cell cytoskeleton showed that the acto-myosin network and cadherin junctions actively remodel during stretch, also keratin network reinforces the monolayer integrity at higher strains. A significant rearrangement and realignment of cells is observed. 
Further, rheological response probed through stress relaxation experiments show stress are dissipated on a minute timescale with increase in length of the tissue. In stress relaxation experiments, suspended monolayer is stretched for some time and then unstretched to measure mechanical response. This increase in length points to the active remodelling of the cell cytoskeleton at molecular scale. However, authors in these experiments did not observe any role played by cell-cell junction and intermediate filaments other than maintaining integrity of the monolayer (Khalilgharibi, N, et al. 2019).
As mentioned, earlier the cells have shown complex response to compression in form of apoptosis, differentiation, and extrusion (ref). In Wyatt T., et al., 2020, the same setup was also used to study monolayer response under fast compression. Just like the slender elastic structures buckles after application of critical compressive stress, this free-standing monolayer buckles after application -35% strain at high strain rates. Intriguingly, the tissue buckling is followed by tissue flattening up to the threshold on -35% strain. The tissue buckling is rapidly eased by actomyosin generated tension within tens of seconds. However, after the threshold strain and higher strain rates stable 3D folds are formed in the epithelia. This revealed mechanisms with which tissues buffer the mechanical stress in response to fast external forces. 
The similar system has been explored with completely different mechanism in Latorre et al., 2018, where the pressurised epithelia display behaviour equivalent to active superelasticity. They used ion pumping of MDCK cell (kidney epithelial cells) with micropatterned substrate with circular non-adhesive ECM patches to create dome like structures. Due to apical to basal ion pumping, cell monolayer delaminates to form engineered 3D epithelia—dome. This system uses soft PDMS gel with beads embedded into it for later measurement of pressure inside the dome. These domes fit very closely to a spherical cap; making structure analogous to a bubble. This fact allowed use of Laplace’s law relating pressure and surface tension in the bubble/dome. The spherical geometry implies uniform tension as the pressure build up underneath is hydrostatic in nature. Here, they were able to stretch individual cells at extreme strains of 500-800%. Interestingly, the cells under uniform tension showed drastically different cellular strains reminding authors of superelastic materials. The superelasticity describes material response when material can undergo large reversible deformations at constant stress by alteration/phase change in microstructural elements like in Nickel-Titanium alloys. The stress-strain response of cells showed initial increase and then long plateau with subsequent increase. Authors could explain it with high resolution imaging; that the cortical actin depletes as cells are stretched and this induces the plateau where cells are rescued by intermediate filament network at the end. These studies have discussed generic principles of cellular mechanisms. Just like superelasticity could have general application in extra-embryonic tissues or blastocysts systems (Hilbrant, M., et al 2016; Hildebrand, S. et al. 2017; Deglincerti, A. et al. 2016).
Just as superelasticity or buckling another interesting physical phenomenon lurking around the corner. Besides providing a framework to understand epithelial mechanics and morphogenesis in vivo, the physics established in these experiments pave the way for a rational manipulation of cell monolayers in organoids and organ-on-a-chip technologies.

## Microfluidics and their applications: Interesting setups to apply forces and creating controlled microenvironment.

Cells have been being cultured on synthetic substrates in ex vivo for more than a century now, but the understanding was limited to 2D and passive environment (Carrel and Burrows, 1911). For studying development and immunity in multicellular tissue/organ context, historically researchers have depended on animal studies (Schmeichel and Bissell, 2003). Through last twenty years, incredible progress has been made in controlling matter at small scale. This gave rise to the currently a huge field of microfluidics and microfabrication. As described earlier, control of microenvironment has been very helpful in understanding the maladies from malaria to cancer (Whitesides, G. M. 2006). In purview of cell mechanics, microfluidic system—cells on chip— has been proven as an outstanding tool for mimicking in vivo conditions and controlling biophysical cues; enabling us to study cell behaviour (Vanapalli SA., et al, 2009). Not just in 2D but recent advances in the culture of cells within 3D contexts has enabled us to begin to model more complex behaviours and tissue functions (Eyckmans, J. and Chen, C.S., 2017). 

## Emerging field of organ-on-a-chip or body-on-the-chip: from developmental angle and physics angle.

With development of more sophisticated 3D cell cultures, the effort is being made to engineer patient specific drug treatments and eliminate animal use in drug testing (Ingber D., 2018). Leading to development of Human ‘organs on chips’, which are microfluidic devices with separate parenchymal and vascular compartments lined by living human cells that mimic the multicellular architecture and relevant functional units of living organs, while providing dynamic vascular perfusion in vitro. This multi-channel design technology was successfully used to create human lung small airway, skin, kidney, intestine, placenta, blood-retinal barrier, blood-brain barrier, neurovascular unit and neuromuscular unit, among others (Kim et al., 2012; Achyuta et al., 2013; Abaci et al., 2015; Benam et al., 2016a; Musah et al., 2017; Yeste et al., 2017; Workman et al., 2018; Kasendra et al., 2018; Sances et al., 2018; reviewed by Bhatia and Ingber, 2014). Also, these chips showed their application in drug testing and patient specific treatment (more reference).
Moreover, these chips have potential for giving insights in developmental and disease mechanics. As our understanding goes that mechanical forces govern cell and tissue development, it is crucial to recreate organ level physical cues, like in the case of the lung involved surface tension at an air-liquid interface, as well as both fluid flow through the vasculature and cyclic mechanical stretch of the tissue-tissue interface due to breathing motions (Huh D., et al., 2010).
These chips could also be used in the modelling cancer by imaging with high-resolution the complex interactions between multiple cancer-associated cell types and ECM molecules that are found in the local tissue microenvironment. For example, in an another version of this chip that uses a heterotypic co-culture approach including up to three different cell types (breast cancer cells, stromal cells and monocytes) in combination with gene expression analysis uncovered mechanism of cell types that interacts through paracrine signalling through production of transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) by breast cancer cells and expression of corresponding receptors by stromal cells (Regier, M. C. et al. 2016).
In developmental biology, it has been observed that culturing iPSC-derived motoneurons and brain microvascular endothelial cells together on a chip model the neuromuscular unit with significantly enhanced function and in vivo-like maturation of spinal cord neural tissue (Sances et al., 2018). This opens new opportunities to in developing current view of self-organization and embryo functions.
What Is to Be Done? Burning Questions of Our Movement
It is very clear that the mechanics and biology of the epithelial tissues is complicated; intertwined by mechano-chemical signalling; and multiscale in its behaviour. The lens of active material has been very helpful in providing information on role of molecular elements in performing biological function. These studies have also led to observe emergent behaviours which would be impossible to see in vivo. The mechanistic understanding has been enhanced with newer mathematical tools and advanced microscopy; enabling us to measure forces involved in the tissues

## Biomimetics?

What remains? Engineering in biological systems have pushed our limits in understanding physiological response, morphogenesis, and pathologies. However, engineers are not just attracted to this subject for its application in health and disease, but for its potential to inspire constructions of new material or engineering systems. At many instances, where new materials have been fabricated inspired by biological matter. Also, improved understanding of biological systems has provided new methods for creating organically optimised systems. Biomimetics is a field where nature continuously inspires human innovation: from hydrophobic surfaces to supersonic passenger plane! Here, epithelial tissue has displayed incredible capabilities such as self-assembly, self-healing, and self-replicating. This makes it a very interesting material for engineers as its study provides new ideas in strength, adaptability, flexibility and functionality aspects of the material.

## What we want to do?
The principles which governs tissue form and function are very important; on two fronts. First, to understand fundamental physical rules of the biology, and secondly for inspiration of new engineering tools and design principles. We want to use state of the art technologies such as bioprinting, microfluidics, and 3D cell cultures to control morphogenetic driving factors individually; giving us opportunity to test tissues from material science point of view. This specific probing allows us to comprehend intricate mechanism of generation of forces, and shape change at cellular and tissue level. Using microfluidic setup, we subject tissues to unravel emergent phenomenon at different spatial and temporal scales.  

