---
title: Introduction: Mechanics
description: Epithelial mechanics
---

## Cell as a mathematical integrator

In simplification, one can imagine each cell in epithelial tissue as a mathematical system which integrates several input types to result in an output behaviour. Such inputs cues can be chemical like soluble chemicals as in morphogen gradients in embryos, and cell-cell/cell-surface signalling molecules; or be mechanical – involving the generation-modification of intra- or intercellular forces as in apical constriction of ventral furrow formation; or external forces of tension/shear like breathing lungs (ref) and flowing blood through vasculature (Fenech, M., et al., 2019). While outputs could be cells shape change, migration, differentiation, or apoptosis. (Kumar, A. et al., 2017) (Figure reference)

## Complex emergent behaviour and matrix interaction

Simple processes like division and deformation in individual cells contribute to complex behaviours which can only be seen at larger scale in collective context like emergence. It has been shown in recent years how guided by biophysical cues in microenvironment give rise to cellular collective migration (Ladoux, B. & Mège, R.-M. 2017), oscillation (Balaji, R. et al. 2017; Serra-Picamal, X. et al. 2012), turbulent motion (Vedula, S. R. K. et al. 2012), or active cell rearrangement (Krajnc, M., et al., 2018). (Figure reference)
Description of actin cytoskeleton and internal force generation 
Any response to biophysical cues is mainly manifested as physical change in the cell which in turn shows up in tissue. The change in shape is related to mechanical properties of the cell, which are largely defined by the actin cytoskeleton. Actin cytoskeleton is a highly polymorphic and multifunctional cellular system that consists of actin filaments (F-actin) organised into various higher-order arrays capable of dynamic remodelling (Svitkina, T. 2018). Its most important function is to generate force. For pushing, actin filaments typically assemble into branched networks assembled by the Arp2/3 complex (Svitkina, T.M. and Borisy, G.G. 1999), while, for contraction, they form composite networks or bundles with bipolar filaments of myosin II (Verkhovsky, A.B. et al. 1995). These generated forces can also propagate through the tissue through cell–cell junctions which form dynamic cellular contacts and the substrate (Halbleib, J. M. & Nelson, W. J. 2006; Sunyer, R., et al, 2016). Cell–matrix and cell–cell junctions are under constant mechanical stress (Maruthamuthu, V., et al., 2011), which causes remodelling of the junctions (Mège, R. M. & Ishiyama, N. 2017) and triggers cell signalling events within the tissue (Ladoux, B. & Mège, R.-M. 2017). 
To summarise, any ‘input cues’ start a cascade of biochemical reactions from ‘mechanosensors’ to cytoskeleton resulting in ‘output response’ through contraction/extension. This process is called as ‘mechanotransduction’ (Harris, A.R., et al., 2018).

## Introduction to models for epithelial mechanics

Advances in experimental technologies and better-resolved spatial-temporal measurements provide more detail view of tissue function and its complex physical and molecular underpinnings. Similarly, advances in engineering and mathematical models allows for exploration of hidden physical phenomenon; along with aiding experimentalists to perform physically motivated experiments. For example, the looped pattern of vertebrate gut tube is reproduced by a simple physical system of differentially strained rubber tube with soft latex sheet composite (Savin, T., et al., 2011). This mathematical theory, depended only on geometry and elasticity, could predict quantitatively with observations of intestinal loops at different stages of development in chick embryo. (Figure reference)
As mentioned before epithelial tissues are excellent examples of complexity spanning the molecular, cellular, and tissue scales. The strong interdependence between mechanical and molecular signals makes it difficult to interpret the relative contribution of different cues to the shaping of epithelial tissues. Mathematical models can help to disentangle this complex relationship. Models are perfect tools for discovery and data interpretation. For instance, they have been useful inferring the mechano-chemical properties in different experimental manipulation like laser ablation, force microscopy, and photobleaching assays (ref; Fradin, C., 2017). 

## History of modelling

There is a history to mathematical modelling of epithelia. Almost 70 years ago, Alan Turing put forth his theory of reaction-diffusion of two chemicals. It showed that interaction of two chemicals can generate intriguing spatial patterns in his paper “The chemical basis of morphogenesis” (Turing, A. 1952). These patterns, Turing patterns, can be seen in leopard’s spots, butterfly’s wings, or fish’s scales (Figure reference). Well now, with much more information of physical forces involved in biological process one can start thinking about mechanochemical basis (Howard, J., Grill, S.W. and Bois, J.S., 2011).
## Introduction to different models

There are mathematical models describing physics and biology at multiple scale. There are hyperelastic continuum material models at larger tissue scales, for example, describing behaviour of cardiovascular system (ref). There are active fluid models at relatively smaller scales explaining epithelial tissue behaviour in systems such as active dewetting or drosophila wing development (ref).
