#LyX file created by tex2lyx 2.3
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin G:/OneDrive - IBEC/Personal/Github_vscode/tex_thesis/LaCaN/0000-Preliminary/
\textclass book
\options final,openright
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package none
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding default
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize 11
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 0
\use_package cancel 0
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 0
\use_package mathtools 0
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 0
\use_package stmaryrd 0
\use_package undertilde 0
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard

\begin_inset ERT
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\backslash
begin{Abstract}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 Epithelial sheets form specialized 3D structures suited to their physiological roles, such as branched alveoli in the lungs, tubes in the kidney, and villi in the intestine. To generate and maintain these structures, epithelia must undergo complex 3D deformations across length and time scales. How epithelial shape arises from active stresses, viscoelasticity, and luminal pressure remains poorly understood. To address this question, here we developed a microfluidic setup and a digital twin to engineer 3D epithelial tissues with controlled shape and pressure. In the experimental setup, an epithelial monolayer is grown on a porous surface with circular low adhesion zones (footprint). On applying hydrostatic pressure, the monolayer delaminates into a spherical cap (dome) from the circular footprint. This simple shape allows us to calculate epithelial tension using Laplace's law. Through this approach, we subject MDCK epithelial cells to a range of lumen pressures at different rates and hence probe the relation between strain and tension in different regimes, while computationally tracking actin dynamics and their mechanical effect at the tissue scale. Slow pressure changes relative to the timescales of actin dynamics allow the tissue to accommodate large strain variations. However, under sudden pressure reductions, the tissue develops buckling patterns and folds with different degrees of symmetry-breaking to store excess tissue area. These insights from experiments and the digital twin allow us to pattern epithelial folds by rationally directed buckling. Our study establishes a new approach for engineering epithelial morphogenetic events. 
\begin_inset ERT
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\backslash
end{Abstract}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\size footnotesize

\emph on
Keywords
\emph default
: epithelial monolayers, actomyosin cytoskeleton, morphogenesis, mechanobiology, microfluidics 
\size default
 
\begin_inset VSpace vfill
\end_inset


\begin_inset Newpage cleardoublepage
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
