# Introduction and motivation

The central focus of this thesis is the epithelial tissue monolayer. From the perspective of a mechanical engineer, these monolayers are endlessly fascinating. They are remarkable in their ability to change shape, self-heal, and continuously deform or jam as needed (citation_needed Xi et al. 2018). They represent the simplest system for gaining a physical understanding of biological morphogenesis, as epithelia can be found everywhere in the body, covering the skin and lining various cavities and organs. The shapes of epithelial monolayers can range from simple spherical blastocysts to highly branched and folded lungs, and they are formed and maintained through constant adaptation and renewal. This thesis aims to explore the physical principles behind epithelial shape by combining theoretical and experimental approaches in the study of simple epithelial monolayers.

The chapters in this part serve as a comprehensive overview of all the key topics related to my PhD research. They begin with a brief introduction to epithelial tissues and their constituent parts, followed by a discussion on the role of mechanics in morphogenesis and various modeling approaches. This part concludes with a review of the growing field of \"bottom-up\" morphogenesis, where researchers are building biological systems from scratch.

# Introduction

The term "epithelia" was first introduced by Dutch botanist Frederick Ruysch in the early 18th century (see fig [1.1](#fig_1_1)). He used it to describe the tissue he observed while dissecting the lips of a cadaver, and the word is derived from Greek roots "epi," meaning top, and "thele," meaning nipple. [^1] A few decades later, Swiss scientist Albrecht von Haller began using the term "epithelium/epithelia" to describe the fibers of the body, following the old Renaissance theory that the body was made of fibers, which were believed to be a fundamental building block of living things. [^2] It was thought that these fibers and tissues arranged in different arrays gave rise to biological structures (MacCord 2012; Zampieri, Coen, and Gabbiani 2014). This theory was not far off, as epithelial tissues make up more than 60% of the cells in a vertebrate's body and are found ubiquitously, covering the organs both inside and out (Alberts 2015).

Epithelial cells are polarized, i.e., their apical side (typically facing the lumen of the organ), which differs in shape and composition from the basolateral side (see fig [\[fig_1\_2\]](#fig_1_2)). Its polar organization is reflected in the vectorial functions like creating and maintaining concentration gradients between separated compartments (Marchiando, Graham, and Turner 2010). Typical examples of these are transporting epithelia such as those of the renal tubule, absorptive epithelia of the intestine, and secretory epithelial cells like  hepatocytes (Alberts 2015). In addition, polarized epithelia guide the developmental process by determining the fate of cells leading to symmetry-breaking events in the embryo (Kim, Korotkevich, and Hiiragi 2018).
