
## 2. Morphogenesis

During embryonic development, epithelia forms transient structures, such as the neural tube, somites, and the precardiac epithelium, that serve as progenitors for the development of more complex organs. Different epithelia acquire diverse morphological forms and performs their specific functions, such as the thyroid follicles, the kidney tubules, the interconnected bile canaliculi and sinusoids in the liver, and the complex branching structures found in the lung and salivary glands (Gumbiner, B.M., 1992). Owing to its multifaceted regulation and hierarchical organization, epithelial morphogenesis is a complex phenomenon dependent on factors at multi spatial-temporal scales.  

It can be fast at cellular level like the change in cell shape driven by apical constrictions, which is required for epithelial remodeling during tube formation of ventral furrow cells in Drosophila gastrulation (Miller CJ, Davidson LA. 2013). Or it could be a slower self-organization at embryo level like a cluster of dissociated mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) cultured in vitro spontaneously form an optic cup, exhibiting all layers of the neural retina, when cultured in appropriate medium  (Eiraku et al., 2011; Bedzhov, I. & Zernicka-Goetz, M. 2014). This structure underwent similar changes to the in vivo tissue like invaginating to form the characteristic morphology of the optical cup without external scaffolding or original growth environment.  

> Figure: slow vs fast process; programmed vs self-organizing structure; function and form logic!

At the end of the day, all cells come from cells (‘omnis cellula e cellula’) (Virchow R.L.K., 1858), all tissues come from cells that contain essentially the same genetic information. Nonetheless, every tissue exhibits a distinct architecture and function. One could ask many questions from here, as how form-function work in synchrony? How organization is triggered physically? Reductionists would ask whether function follows form, or it is other way around.

As per the twentieth century architecture principle of “Form Follows Function”;  where the organization of a structure should be based upon its intended function. In developmental biology there are many examples of indicating that the same principle is at work in self-assembling systems like intestinal organoids, cancerous spheroids, and functional kidney tissues (Gjorevski, N, et al. 2016; Ishiguro, T, et al. 2017; Morizane, R. and Bonventre, J.V., 2017). Each emerging out of a set of cells in appropriate environment changing and adapting itself to perform the biological function. However, exactly the opposite design principle is at work in numerous in vitro experiments with controlled cellular environment; illustrating geometric constraints drives biological function. For instance, in a micropatterned collagen scaffold (with structures of intestine) a human small intestinal epithelium was generated that replicates key features of the in vivo small intestine: a crypt-villus architecture with appropriate cell-lineage compartmentalization and an accessible luminal surface (Wang, Y et al., 2017). Or cell reprogramming like in case of fibroblasts turning into induced neurons when supported by specific substrate topography (Kulangara et al. 2014).  

> Figure: images from D'arcy thompson book and connecting it to the new work of forces.

One could easily reach a conclusion that there are more things involved in understanding dialectics of form and function. This was a subject of D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s classical text “On Growth and Form” (Thompson, 1917). Thompson tries to explore biological forms during development and across evolution with considering geometric and physical constraints. (*<mark>Here talk more about specific examples from the book</mark>*) After more than 100 years of its publishing we can answer more specific questions about shape and function using advances in bioengineering and microscopy.

> Structure without function is a corpse, function without structure is a ghost (Wainwright, S.A., 1988.)

It is quite apparent after reading till here that there is a specter is haunting this subject—the specter of force. In last couple of decades, there has been a resurgence of interest in physical forces as regulator of development, homeostasis, and disease (Ingber, D. 2005; Barnes, J.M. et al., 2017). This has led researchers across the disciplines to examine the physical mechanisms of tissue formation and its regulation. Unravelling mechanism of Thompson’s mysteriously generated ‘Diagram of the forces’ which governs biological processes (Thompson, 1917; Heer, N.C. and Martin, A.C., 2017).